It may seem off, even paradoxical, that the enhancement of a technique may expose its weaknesses and limitations, but it should not surprise us. The capacity of the human mind for sloppy thinking and for rationalizing, for explaining away the consequences of its sloppy thinking, is very large. If a particular technique requires an enormous amount of computation and if only a limited computational effort can be devoted to it, then a failure of the technique can easily be explained away on the ground that, because of the computational limitations, it was never really tested. The technique itself is / immunized against critical examination by such evasions. Indeed, it may well be fortified, for the belief that an otherwise faultless and probably enormously powerful technique is cramped by some single limitation tends to lead the devotee to put effort into removing that limitation. When this limitation seems to him to be entirely computational, and when a computer is offered to help remove it, he may well launch a program of intensive, time-consuming “research” aimed at simply “computerizing” his technique. Such programs usually generate subproblems of a strictly computational nature that tend, by virtue of their very magnitude, to increasingly dominate the task and, unless great care is taken to avoid it, to eventually become the center of attention. As ever more investment is made in attacking these initially ancillary subproblems, and as progress is made on cracking them, an illusion tends to grow that real work is being done on the main problem. The poverty of the technique, if it is indeed impotent to deal with its presumed subject matter, is thus hidden behind a mountain of effort, much of which may well be successful in its own terms. But these are terms in a constructed context that has no substantive overlap with, or even relationship to, the context determined by the problem to which the original technique is to be applied. The collection of subproblems together with the lore, jargon, and sub techniques which crystalized around them, becomes reified. The larger this collection is, and the more human energy has been invested in its creation, the more real it seems. And the harder the subproblems were to solve and the more technical success was gained in solving them, the more is the original technique fortified.

pp. 35-36